# Response to Blumenstock
Henry Buron

January 27

  Data science has the potential to revolutionize the way in which aid is given to developing countries. Using data from mobile phones and satellite images, among other things, machine-learning algorithms can be used to generate credit scores for people who otherwise would not be able to get them, and even match resources to people living in poverty. Governments would be able to assist those in need in a much more effective and efficient manner. However, this is not a walk in the park, as there are pitfalls when using data science. For example, if a government were to base their actions primarily off the data they collect from mobile phones, they may inadvertently be empowering those who already have power, the rich, rather than those who they are specifically trying to help. This is because to have a phone, one must not only be able to read, but also have enough money to purchase a phone in the first place. The rich are disproportionately more likely to have both of these things. So, in summary, the most disadvantaged people are often the least represented. In addition, when people realize what data is being used to determine how much aid they get, they are able to take advantage of the system. For example, one system used satellite imagery to measure how many thatched roofs existed in a certain area; the more thatched roofs, the more aid was given. People realized that this was happening, and so they would pretend to live under a thatched roof in order to get more aid. When this happens, less aid is given to the people that need it the most, and the system becomes flawed. However, there is a way forward. For instance, the technology that is being used can be customized to cater towards its target population. It doesn't make sense to make decisions based off of things like how many times someone was tagged in a Facebook picture, because many people in developing countries don't even have Facebook. In addition, it is important to deepen the collaboration between data scientists, development experts, governments, civil society, and the private sector. Many of the algorithms that are used are made by people who's priority is profit and do not have an intimate understanding of the problems. If all the benefacting groups are able to work together throughout the entire process - from creating the algorithms to providing the aid - a better result is almost certain.

  I agree that good intent, on its own, is not enough in data science when dealing with problems that have such an impact on people's lives. But, when combined with transparency across the board, the "balancing act" becomes easier. Transparency allows for collaboration, and collaboration makes the desirable intersection between data science and human development (where they can compliment eachother to the most of their ability) much more attainable. It's tough because it could seem that in theory, data science is all that is needed. But even with all the good intent in the world, modeling humans in a way like this is a great undertaking, and cannot be done effectively without an intimate understanding of human development. With transparency on both sides, these two fields are able to meet, and this balancing act can be perfected.
