## Response to Wardrop

Henry Buron

February 17, 2020

In the reading for today, the authors (Wardrop et al.) introduce a top-down approach as well as a bottom-up approach. The top-down method consists of using administrative boundaries to collect initial data (i.e. a normal census), and then, using covariate data, redistribute the data at more detailed scales. The bottom-up method consists of using population counts from small, defined areas (“microcensus surveys”), and then linking this data to spatial covariate data to estimate population in unsurveyed locations.

Both approaches have the same purpose: to produce population estimates for small areas or uniform, high spatial-resolution grids However, based on the location of the desired population estimate, one method might be more helpful. For example, the top-down method is only as good as the census on which it is based. Completing an accurate national census is an extensive and time-consuming process, which makes it harder for lower and middle income countries to do. For example, Lebanon’s last national census was conducted in 1932, and because the data is no longer relevant, the top-down method would be ineffective. Instead, it would be much more effective to use the bottom-up method, which essentially uses a small census and then scales it up to predict population data for the rest of the country. In addition, the bottom-up method is cheaper and quicker than the top-down method. However, that is not to say the bottom-up method is flawless. By nature of being relatively cheap, it can potentially be completed by groups other than the central government, multiple claims about a population can be made. Entirely basing a country’s population estimate off of a bottom-up model creates questions about the estimate’s accuracy. This is a large concern because this data has the ability to affect many people’s lives (per capita rate estimates, shift political representation, etc.). In addition, several studies of the bottom-up method concluded that it overestimated population in rural areas where many of the buildings are non-residential, and that it underestimated in urban areas where many of the buildings have multiple levels.

Limitations aside, the bottom-up method still offers a relevant, reliable, and efficient method for estimating population distribution compared to the past, traditional blanket-view offered by the census. This can truly be a lifesaver in lower and middle income countries during an emergency, such as the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, when this data is needed urgently.
